docs: add documentation for the --experimental-include-runtime flag (draft) (#15750)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: src/content/docs/workers/languages/typescript/index.mdx

head:
  - tag: title
    content: Write Cloudflare Workers in TypeScript
---

import { TabItem, Tabs } from "~/components";

## TypeScript

TypeScript is a first-class language on Cloudflare Workers. Cloudflare publishes type definitions to [GitHub](https://github.com/cloudflare/workers-types) and [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@cloudflare/workers-types) (`npm install -D @cloudflare/workers-types`). All APIs provided in Workers are fully typed, and type definitions are generated directly from [workerd](https://github.com/cloudflare/workerd), the open-source Workers runtime.

### Generate types that match your Worker's configuration (experimental)

Cloudflare continuously improves [workerd](https://github.com/cloudflare/workerd), the open-source Workers runtime.

> Some updates change the TypeScript types that APIs return. For example, the [`urlsearchparams_delete_has_value_arg`](/workers/configuration/compatibility-dates/#urlsearchparams-delete-and-has-value-argument) compatibility flag adds optional arguments to some methods, in order to support new additions to the WHATWG URL standard API.

Reviewer: I'm not a huge fan of the wording here, `Some updates change the TypeScript types` makes it sound like workerd has built-in TypeScript support to me 😕 

What about something like:
```
Changes in workerd can introduce JavaScript API changes thus changing the respective TypeScript types.
```

Author: Yep, I think that makes sense 👍

This means the correct TypeScript types for your Worker depend on:

1. Your Worker's [Compatibility Date](/workers/configuration/compatibility-dates/).
2. Your Worker's [Compatibility Flags](/workers/configuration/compatibility-dates/#compatibility-flags).

> For example, if you have `compatibility_flags = ["nodejs_als"]` in your `wrangler.toml`, then the runtime will allow you to use the [AsyncLocalStorage](https://nodejs.org/api/async_context.html#class-asynclocalstorage) class in your worker code, but you will not see this reflected in the type definitions in `@cloudflare/workers-types`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you have `compatibility_flags = ["nodejs_als"]` in your `wrangler.toml`, then the runtime will allow you to use the [`AsyncLocalStorage`](https://nodejs.org/api/async_context.html#class-asynclocalstorage) class in your worker code, but you will not see this reflected in the type definitions in `@cloudflare/workers-types`.
```

In order to solve this issue, and to ensure that your type definitions are always up-to-date with your compatibility settings, you can dynamically generate the runtime types (as of `wrangler 3.66.0`):

```bash

> wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime

Reviewer: I don't think that this is correct, as this would not work unless you have wrangler globally installed (which we discourage)

I think this should be `npx wrangler ...` (with all the other pm alternatives if needed)

(This applies to the other similar commands in this PR)

Author: Good call 👍

```

This will generate a `d.ts` file and (by default) save it to `.wrangler/types/runtime.d.ts`. You will be prompted in the command's output to add that file to your `tsconfig.json`'s `compilerOptions.types` array.

If you would like to commit the file to git, you can provide a custom path. Here, for instance, the `runtime.d.ts` file will be saved to the root of your project:

```bash
wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime="./runtime.d.ts"
```

**Note: To ensure that your types are always up-to-date, make sure to run `wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime` after any changes to your config file.**

> See [the full list of available flags](/workers/wrangler/commands/#types) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [the full list of available flags](/workers/configuration/compatibility-dates/#compatibility-flagss) for more details.
```

Author: This is actually for the `wrangler types` command flags, not the compatibility flags.

Reviewer: ahhh ok I see 😅👍

#### Migrating from `@cloudflare/workers-types` to `wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime`

> The `@cloudflare/workers-types` package provides runtime types according to your compatibility date, but is superceeded by the `wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime` command.

Reviewer: `according to your compatibility date` sounds very ambiguous to me and can give the impression the `@cloudflare/workers-types` does take into account the compat date from the config file

I think we should clarify that that's not the case

what about something like this for example?:
```suggestion
The `@cloudflare/workers-types` package provides runtime types according to the used [date entrypoint](https://github.com/cloudflare/workerd/tree/main/npm/workers-types#compatibility-dates), but is superceeded by the `wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime` command.
```

Author: What about something like this? To be more explicit.

```
The `@cloudflare/workers-types` package provides runtime types for each distinct [compatibility date](https://github.com/cloudflare/workerd/tree/main/npm/workers-types#compatibility-dates), and specified by the user in their `tsconfig.json`. But this package is superseded by the `wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime` command.
```

Reviewer: sounds good to me 😄

Here are the steps to switch from `@cloudflare/workers-types` to using `wrangler types` with the experimental runtime inclusion:

##### Uninstall `@cloudflare/workers-types`

<Tabs> <TabItem label="npm">

```sh
npm uninstall @cloudflare/workers-types
```

</TabItem> <TabItem label="yarn">

```sh
yarn remove @cloudflare/workers-types
```

</TabItem> <TabItem label="pnpm">

```sh
pnpm uninstall @cloudflare/workers-types
```

</TabItem> <TabItem label="bun">

```sh
bun remove @cloudflare/workers-types
```

</TabItem> </Tabs>

##### Generate runtime types using wrangler

```bash
wrangler types --experimental-include-runtime
```

This will generate a `.d.ts` file, saved to `.wrangler/types/runtime.d.ts` by default.

##### Update your `tsconfig.json` to include the generated types

```json
{
	"compilerOptions": {

> 		"types": ["./.wrangler/types/runtime"]

Reviewer: Nit:
I am not sure what's better, putting this into `types` or simply including `.wrangler/types` in the tsconfig [`include` option](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#include)

e.g.:
```ts
	"include": ["worker-configuration.d.ts", ".wrangler/types", "src/**/*.ts"]
```

According to the [TypeScript docs](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#types) `types` seems more appropriate for packages 🤔 

`include` has the nice benefit that we could change the `d.ts` generation (file name, number of files, etc...) and things would still work for users without them needing to change their tsconfig

Author: I think the problem is that if you don't have an `include` field, then this addition will restrict the included files to only the runtime types declaration file.

Reviewer: good point 😕 :+1:
